addons/binding/org.openhab.binding.somfytahoma/README.md, before:

# Somfy Tahoma Binding

This binding integrates the [Somfy Tahoma](https://www.somfy.fr/produits/domotique/maison-connectee-tahoma) home automation system.

## Supported Things

Currently supports these things

- bridge (Somfy Tahoma bridge, which can discover gateways, roller shutters, awnings, switches and action groups)
- gateways (Somfy Tahoma gateway - getting firmware version)
- roller shutters (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a roller shutter). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a shutter (0-100%)
- blinds (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a blind). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a blinds (0-100%) as well as orientation of slats (0-100%)
- screens (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a screen). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a screen (0-100%)
- garage doors (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a garage door). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a garage door (0-100%)
- awnings (UP, DOWN, STOP control of an awning). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of an awning (0-100%)
- on/off switches (connected by RTS, IO protocol or supported by USB stick - z-wave, enocean, ..)
- light switches (similar to on/off)
- light sensors (luminance value)
- occupancy sensors (OPEN/CLOSE contact)
- smoke sensors (OPEN/CLOSE contact)
- action groups (scenarios which can execute predefined Tahoma group of steps, e.g. send to all roller shutters DOWN command, one by one)

Both Somfy Tahoma and Somfy Connexoon gateways have been confirmed working.

## Discovery

To start a discovery, just
 
- install this binding
- open Paper UI
- add a new thing in menu Configuration/Things
- choose SomfyTahoma Binding and select Somfy Tahoma Bridge
- enter your email (login) and password to the TahomaLink cloud portal
 
If the supplied TahomaLink credentials are correct, the automatic discovery starts immediately and detected roller shutters, awnings, switches and action groups appear in Paper UI inbox. 

## Thing Configuration

To manually configure the thing you have to specify bridge and things in *.things file in conf/addons directory of your OpenHAB 2.x installation.
To manually link the thing channels to items just use the *.items file in conf/items directory of your OpenHAB 2.x installation. 
To retrieve thing configuration and url parameter, just add the automatically discovered device from you inbox and copy its values from thing edit page. (the url parameter is visible on edit page only)
Please see the example below.

## Channels

A bridge does not expose any channel.

Gateways expose this read only channel:

- version (this is a firmware version of your Tahoma gateway)

Roller shutters, exterior screens, garage doors and awnings expose these channels:

- position (a percentual position of the device, it can have value 0-100). For IO Homecontrol devices only (non RTS)!
- control (a device controller which reacts to commands UP/DOWN/STOP)

Blinds expose on top of position and control channels

- orientation (a percentual orientation of the blind's slats, it can have value 0-100). For IO Homecontrol devices only (non RTS)!

When STOP command received two possible behaviours are possible

- when the roller shutter is idle then MY command is interpreted (the roller shutter/exterior screen/awning goes to your favourite position)
- when the roller shutter is moving then STOP command is interpreted (the roller shutter/exterior screen/awning stops)

An action group thing has this channel:

- trigger (a switch which reacts to ON command and triggers the predefined Tahoma action)

An on/off and light thing has this channel:

- switch (reacts to standard ON/OFF commands)

A smoke sensor and occupancy sensor has this channel:

- contact (normal value is CLOSE, changes to OPEN when detection triggered)

A light sensors exposes this channel:

- luminance (light luminance value in luxes) 

## Full Example

.things file

```
Bridge somfytahoma:bridge:237dbae7 "Somfy Tahoma Bridge" [ email="my@email.com", password="MyPassword", refresh=30 ] {
    Thing gateway 1214-4519-8041 "Tahoma gateway" [ id="1214-4519-8041" ]
    Thing rollershutter 31da8dac-8e09-455a-bc7a-6ed70f740001 "Bedroom" [ url="io://0204-1234-8041/6825356" ]
    Thing rollershutter 87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004 "Living room" [ url="io://0204-1234-8041/3832644" ]
    Thing rollershutter 68bee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234 "Hall" [ url="io://0204-1234-8041/4873641" ]
    Thing actiongroup 2104c46f-478d-6543-956a-10bd93b5dc54 "1st floor up" [ url="2104c46f-478d-6543-956a-10bd93b5dc54" ]
    Thing actiongroup 0b5f195a-5223-5432-b1af-f5fa1d59074f "1st floor down" [ url="0b5f195a-5223-5432-b1af-f5fa1d59074f" ]
    Thing actiongroup 712c0019-b422-1234-b4da-208e249c571b "2nd floor up" [ url="712c0019-b422-1234-b4da-208e249c571b" ]
    Thing actiongroup e201637b-de3b-1234-b7af-5693811a953b "2nd floor down" [ url="e201637b-de3b-1234-b7af-5693811a953b" ]
    Thing onoff 095d6c49-9712-4220-a4c3-d3bb7a6cc5f0 "Zwave switch" [ url="zwave://0204-4519-8041/5" ]
    Thing light 1b8e7d29-bf1e-4ae1-9432-3dfef52ef14d "Light switch" [ url="enocean://0204-4519-8041/4294453515/2" ]
    Thing lightsensor 2c90808c3a0c193f013a743f2f660f12 "Light sensor" [ url="io://0204-4519-8041/13527450" ]
    Thing occupancysensor 995e16ca-07c4-4111-9cda-504cb5120f82 "Occupancy sensor" [ url="io://0204-4519-8041/4855758" ]
    Thing smokesensor 9438e6ff-c17e-40d7-a4b4-3e797eca5bf7 "Smoke sensor" [ url="io://0204-4510-8041/13402124" ]
}
```

Awnings, garage doors and exterior screens have the same notation as roller shutters. Just use "awning", "garagedoor" or "exteriorscreen" instead of "rolleshutter" in thing definition. 

.items file

```
String TahomaVersion "Tahoma version [%s]" { channel="somfytahoma:gateway:237dbae7:1214-4519-8041:version" }
Rollershutter RollerShutterBedroom "Roller shutter [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:31da8dac-8e09-455a-bc7a-6ed70f740001:control"}
Dimmer RollerShutterBedroomD "Roller shutter dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:31da8dac-8e09-455a-bc7a-6ed70f740001:position"}
Rollershutter RollerShutterLiving "Roller shutter [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004:control" }
Dimmer RollerShutterLivingD "Roller shutter dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004:position"}
Rollershutter RollerShutterHall "Roller shutter [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:68bee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:control"}
Dimmer RollerShutterHallD "Roller shutter dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:68bee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:position"}

Rollershutter AwningTerrace "Terrace awning [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:awning:237dbae7:24cee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:control"}
Dimmer AwningTerraceD "Terrace awning dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:awning:237dbae7:24cee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:position"}

Switch Rollers1UP "Rollers 1st floor UP" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:2104c46f-478d-6543-956a-10bd93b5dc54:trigger", autoupdate="false"}
Switch Rollers1DOWN "Rollers 1st floor DOWN" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:0b5f195a-5223-5432-b1af-f5fa1d59074f:trigger", autoupdate="false"}
Switch Rollers2UP "Rollers 2nd floor UP" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:712c0019-b422-1234-b4da-208e249c571b:trigger", autoupdate="false"}
Switch Rollers2DOWN "Rollers 2nd floor DOWN" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:e201637b-de3b-1234-b7af-5693811a953b:trigger", autoupdate="false"}

Switch TahomaZwaveSwitch "Switch" { channel="somfytahoma:onoff:237dbae7:095d6c49-9712-4220-a4c3-d3bb7a6cc5f0:switch" }
Switch TahomaLightSwitch "Light Switch" { channel="somfytahoma:light:237dbae7:1b8e7d29-bf1e-4ae1-9432-3dfef52ef14d:switch" }

Number LightSensor "Light Sensor [%.1f lux]" { channel="somfytahoma:lightsensor:237dbae7:2c90808c3a0c193f013a743f2f660f12:luminance" }

Contact OccupancySensor "Occupancy Sensor is [%s]" { channel="somfytahoma:occupancysensor:237dbae7:995e16ca-07c4-4111-9cda-504cb5120f82:contact" }
Contact SmokeSensor "Smoke Sensor is [%s]" { channel="somfytahoma:smokesensor:237dbae7:9438e6ff-c17e-40d7-a4b4-3e797eca5bf7:contact" }
```

## Alexa compatibility

This binding is compatible with the official Alexa Smart Home Skill. 
Since Rolleshutter items are unsupported, only Dimmer with position channel can be used.
Syntax in .item file is as follows:

```
Dimmer RollerShutterLivingD "Roller shutter living [%.1f]"  [ "Lighting" ] {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004:position"}
```

Alexa can set the roller shutter (awning, blind, ...) to a specific position as well as send ON (interpretted as UP) and OFF commands (interpretted as DOWN).

Commit message:

Added new thing "window" Improved binding robustness
Signed-off-by: Ondrej Pecta <opecta@gmail.com>

addons/binding/org.openhab.binding.somfytahoma/README.md, after:

# Somfy Tahoma Binding

This binding integrates the [Somfy Tahoma](https://www.somfy.fr/produits/domotique/maison-connectee-tahoma) home automation system.

## Supported Things

Currently supports these things

- bridge (Somfy Tahoma bridge, which can discover gateways, roller shutters, awnings, switches and action groups)
- gateways (Somfy Tahoma gateway - getting firmware version)
- roller shutters (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a roller shutter). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a shutter (0-100%)
- blinds (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a blind). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a blinds (0-100%) as well as orientation of slats (0-100%)
- screens (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a screen). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a screen (0-100%)
- garage doors (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a garage door). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a garage door (0-100%)
- awnings (UP, DOWN, STOP control of an awning). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of an awning (0-100%)
- windows (UP, DOWN, STOP control of a window). IO Homecontrol devices are allowed to set exact position of a window (0-100%)
- on/off switches (connected by RTS, IO protocol or supported by USB stick - z-wave, enocean, ..)
- light switches (similar to on/off)
- light sensors (luminance value)
- occupancy sensors (OPEN/CLOSE contact)
- smoke sensors (OPEN/CLOSE contact)
- action groups (scenarios which can execute predefined Tahoma group of steps, e.g. send to all roller shutters DOWN command, one by one)

Both Somfy Tahoma and Somfy Connexoon gateways have been confirmed working.

## Discovery

To start a discovery, just
 
- install this binding
- open Paper UI
- add a new thing in menu Configuration/Things
- choose SomfyTahoma Binding and select Somfy Tahoma Bridge
- enter your email (login) and password to the TahomaLink cloud portal
 
If the supplied TahomaLink credentials are correct, the automatic discovery starts immediately and detected roller shutters, awnings, switches and action groups appear in Paper UI inbox. 

## Thing Configuration

To manually configure the thing you have to specify bridge and things in *.things file in conf/addons directory of your OpenHAB 2.x installation.
To manually link the thing channels to items just use the *.items file in conf/items directory of your OpenHAB 2.x installation. 
To retrieve thing configuration and url parameter, just add the automatically discovered device from you inbox and copy its values from thing edit page. (the url parameter is visible on edit page only)
Please see the example below.

## Channels

A bridge does not expose any channel.

Gateways expose this read only channel:

- version (this is a firmware version of your Tahoma gateway)

Roller shutters, screens, blinds, garage doors, awnings & windows expose these channels:

- position (a percentual position of the device, it can have value 0-100). For IO Homecontrol devices only (non RTS)!
- control (a device controller which reacts to commands UP/DOWN/STOP)

Blinds expose on top of position and control channels

- orientation (a percentual orientation of the blind's slats, it can have value 0-100). For IO Homecontrol devices only (non RTS)!

When STOP command received two possible behaviours are possible

- when the roller shutter is idle then MY command is interpreted (the roller shutter/exterior screen/awning goes to your favourite position)
- when the roller shutter is moving then STOP command is interpreted (the roller shutter/exterior screen/awning stops)

An action group thing has this channel:

- trigger (a switch which reacts to ON command and triggers the predefined Tahoma action)

An on/off and light thing has this channel:

- switch (reacts to standard ON/OFF commands)

A smoke sensor and occupancy sensor has this channel:

- contact (normal value is CLOSE, changes to OPEN when detection triggered)

A light sensors exposes this channel:

- luminance (light luminance value in luxes) 

## Full Example

.things file

```
Bridge somfytahoma:bridge:237dbae7 "Somfy Tahoma Bridge" [ email="my@email.com", password="MyPassword", refresh=30 ] {
    Thing gateway 1214-4519-8041 "Tahoma gateway" [ id="1214-4519-8041" ]
    Thing rollershutter 31da8dac-8e09-455a-bc7a-6ed70f740001 "Bedroom" [ url="io://0204-1234-8041/6825356" ]
    Thing rollershutter 87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004 "Living room" [ url="io://0204-1234-8041/3832644" ]
    Thing rollershutter 68bee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234 "Hall" [ url="io://0204-1234-8041/4873641" ]
    Thing actiongroup 2104c46f-478d-6543-956a-10bd93b5dc54 "1st floor up" [ url="2104c46f-478d-6543-956a-10bd93b5dc54" ]
    Thing actiongroup 0b5f195a-5223-5432-b1af-f5fa1d59074f "1st floor down" [ url="0b5f195a-5223-5432-b1af-f5fa1d59074f" ]
    Thing actiongroup 712c0019-b422-1234-b4da-208e249c571b "2nd floor up" [ url="712c0019-b422-1234-b4da-208e249c571b" ]
    Thing actiongroup e201637b-de3b-1234-b7af-5693811a953b "2nd floor down" [ url="e201637b-de3b-1234-b7af-5693811a953b" ]
    Thing onoff 095d6c49-9712-4220-a4c3-d3bb7a6cc5f0 "Zwave switch" [ url="zwave://0204-4519-8041/5" ]
    Thing light 1b8e7d29-bf1e-4ae1-9432-3dfef52ef14d "Light switch" [ url="enocean://0204-4519-8041/4294453515/2" ]
    Thing lightsensor 2c90808c3a0c193f013a743f2f660f12 "Light sensor" [ url="io://0204-4519-8041/13527450" ]
    Thing occupancysensor 995e16ca-07c4-4111-9cda-504cb5120f82 "Occupancy sensor" [ url="io://0204-4519-8041/4855758" ]
    Thing smokesensor 9438e6ff-c17e-40d7-a4b4-3e797eca5bf7 "Smoke sensor" [ url="io://0204-4510-8041/13402124" ]
}
```

Awnings, garage doors, screens, blinds, and windows have the same notation as roller shutters. Just use "awning", "garagedoor", "screen", "blind" or "window" instead of "rolleshutter" in thing definition. 

.items file

```
String TahomaVersion "Tahoma version [%s]" { channel="somfytahoma:gateway:237dbae7:1214-4519-8041:version" }
Rollershutter RollerShutterBedroom "Roller shutter [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:31da8dac-8e09-455a-bc7a-6ed70f740001:control"}
Dimmer RollerShutterBedroomD "Roller shutter dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:31da8dac-8e09-455a-bc7a-6ed70f740001:position"}
Rollershutter RollerShutterLiving "Roller shutter [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004:control" }
Dimmer RollerShutterLivingD "Roller shutter dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004:position"}
Rollershutter RollerShutterHall "Roller shutter [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:68bee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:control"}
Dimmer RollerShutterHallD "Roller shutter dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:68bee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:position"}

Rollershutter AwningTerrace "Terrace awning [%d %%]"  {channel="somfytahoma:awning:237dbae7:24cee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:control"}
Dimmer AwningTerraceD "Terrace awning dimmer [%.1f]"  {channel="somfytahoma:awning:237dbae7:24cee082-63ab-421d-9830-3ea561601234:position"}

Switch Rollers1UP "Rollers 1st floor UP" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:2104c46f-478d-6543-956a-10bd93b5dc54:trigger", autoupdate="false"}
Switch Rollers1DOWN "Rollers 1st floor DOWN" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:0b5f195a-5223-5432-b1af-f5fa1d59074f:trigger", autoupdate="false"}
Switch Rollers2UP "Rollers 2nd floor UP" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:712c0019-b422-1234-b4da-208e249c571b:trigger", autoupdate="false"}
Switch Rollers2DOWN "Rollers 2nd floor DOWN" {channel="somfytahoma:actiongroup:237dbae7:e201637b-de3b-1234-b7af-5693811a953b:trigger", autoupdate="false"}

Switch TahomaZwaveSwitch "Switch" { channel="somfytahoma:onoff:237dbae7:095d6c49-9712-4220-a4c3-d3bb7a6cc5f0:switch" }
Switch TahomaLightSwitch "Light Switch" { channel="somfytahoma:light:237dbae7:1b8e7d29-bf1e-4ae1-9432-3dfef52ef14d:switch" }

Number LightSensor "Light Sensor [%.1f lux]" { channel="somfytahoma:lightsensor:237dbae7:2c90808c3a0c193f013a743f2f660f12:luminance" }

Contact OccupancySensor "Occupancy Sensor is [%s]" { channel="somfytahoma:occupancysensor:237dbae7:995e16ca-07c4-4111-9cda-504cb5120f82:contact" }
Contact SmokeSensor "Smoke Sensor is [%s]" { channel="somfytahoma:smokesensor:237dbae7:9438e6ff-c17e-40d7-a4b4-3e797eca5bf7:contact" }
```

## Alexa compatibility

This binding is compatible with the official Alexa Smart Home Skill. 
Since Rolleshutter items are unsupported, only Dimmer with position channel can be used.
Syntax in .item file is as follows:

```
Dimmer RollerShutterLivingD "Roller shutter living [%.1f]"  [ "Lighting" ] {channel="somfytahoma:rollershutter:237dbae7:87bf0403-a45d-4037-b874-28f4ece30004:position"}
```

Alexa can set the roller shutter (awning, blind, ...) to a specific position as well as send ON (interpretted as UP) and OFF commands (interpretted as DOWN).
